---
layout: post
title: "《Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind》读书笔记"
date: 2015-07-02
categories:
- 读书笔记
tags: 
---

The state and the market approached people with an offer that could not be refused. 'Become individuals,' they said. 'Marry whomever you desire, without asking permission from your parents. Take up whatever job suits you, even if community elders frown. Live wherever you wish, even if you cannot make it every week to the family dinner. You are no longer dependent on your family or your community. We, the state and the market, will take care of you instead. We will provide food, shelter, education, health, welfare and employment. We will provide pensions, insurance and protection.'

国家和市场向人们提出了一个你无法拒绝的建议。"做一个个体，" 他们说，"娶(嫁)你想娶(嫁)的人，不需要父母的同意。接受适合你的工作，即使社区长者不乐意。住在你想住的地方，即便是你因此没法儿参加每周的家庭聚会。你不用再依靠你的家族或社区。我们，国家和市场，将会替他们照顾好你。我们会提供食物、庇护所、教育、健康、福利、和工作。我们还会提供退休金、保险、和保护。"

One interesting conclusion is that money does indeed bring happiness. But only up to a point, and beyond that point it has little significance.

一个有趣的结论是，钱确实带来开心。但只能到某种程度，过了那个点，它就几乎没用了。

This raises the possibility that the immense improvement in material conditions over the last two centuries was offset by the collapse of the family and the community.

这提出了一个可能性，过去两个世纪的物质条件的极大改善被家庭和社区的崩塌抵消了。 

Even the freedom we value so highly may be working against us. We can choose our spouses, friends and neighbours, but they can choose to leave us. With the individual wielding unprecedented power to decide her own path in life, we find it ever harder to make commitments. We thus live in an increasingly lonely world of unravelling communities and families.

即便我们这么看重的自由也许反而针对我们。我们可以选择配偶、朋友和邻居，但他们也可以选择离开我们。伴随着个体得到前所未有的选择自己生活的力量，我们发现做出承诺更加困难。因此我们生活在一个不断增长地孤独的拆散社区和家庭的世界。

stop not only the pursuit of external achievements, but also pursuit of inner feelings. 

不仅要停止外部成就的追求，也要停止对内在感情的追求。

When things improve, expectations balloon, and consequently even dramatic improvements in objective conditions can leave us dissatisfied.

当事情改善了，期望就会膨胀，结果客观条件的巨大改善反而导致我们不满足。

When things deteriorate, expectations shrink, and consequently even a severe illness might leave you pretty much as happy as you were before.

当事情变坏了，期待也会降低，结果即便是重病也许使我我们和之前一样快乐。

When we try to guess or imagine how happy other people are now, or how people in the past were, we inevitably imagine ourselves in their shoes. But that won’t work because it pastes our expectations on to the material conditions of others.

当我们试图去猜测或想象其他人现在有多开心，或者过去人们有多开心，我们不可避免的把我们放在他们的处境。但那样不行，因为这把我们的期望和他们的物质条件刚在一起比较。

In previous eras the standard of beauty was set by the handful of people who lived next door to you. Today the media and the fashion industry expose us to a totally unrealistic standard of beauty. They search out the most gorgeous people on the planet, and then parade them constantly before our eyes. No wonder we are far less happy with the way we look.

Happiness and misery play a role in evolution only to the extent that they encourage or discourage survival and reproduction. Perhaps it’s not surprising, then, that evolution has moulded us to be neither too miserable nor too happy. It enables us to enjoy a momentary rush of pleasant sensations, but these never last for ever. Sooner or later they subside and give place to unpleasant sensations.

Some scholars compare human biochemistry to an air-conditioning system that keeps the temperature constant, come heatwave or snowstorm. Events might momentarily change the temperature, but the air-conditioning system always returns the temperature to the same set point.

Human happiness conditioning systems also differ from person to person. On a scale from one to ten, some people are born with a cheerful biochemical system that allows their mood to swing between levels six and ten, stabilising with time at eight. Such a person is quite happy even if she lives in an alienating big city, loses all her money in a stock-exchange crash and is diagnosed with diabetes. Other people are cursed with a gloomy biochemistry that swings between three and seven and stabilises at five. Such an unhappy person remains depressed even if she enjoys the support of a tight-knit community, wins millions in the lottery and is as healthy as an Olympic athlete.

We tend to believe that if we could just change our workplace, get married, finish writing that novel, buy a new car or repay the mortgage, we would be on top of the world. Yet when we get what we desire we don’t seem to be any happier. Buying cars and writing novels do not change our biochemistry. They can startle it for a fleeting moment, but it is soon back to its set point.


It is true that married people are happier than singles and divorcees, but that does not necessarily mean that marriage produces happiness. It could be that happiness causes marriage. Or more correctly, that serotonin, dopamine and oxytocin bring about and maintain a marriage.
 

Our mental air-conditioning system has some freedom of movement within predetermined borders. It is almost impossible to exceed the upper and lower emotional boundaries, but marriage and divorce can have an impact in the area between the two. Somebody born with an average of level five happiness would never dance wildly in the streets. But a good marriage should enable her to enjoy level seven from time to time, and to avoid the despondency of level three.


Those who won a cheerful biochemistry in the genetic lottery were just as happy before the revolution as after.
 

If we invest billions in understanding our brain chemistry and developing appropriate treatments, we can make people far happier than ever before, without any need of revolutions. 

Nothing captures the biological argument better than the famous New Age slogan: ‘Happiness Begins Within.’ Money, social status, plastic surgery, beautiful houses, powerful positions – none of these will bring you happiness. Lasting happiness comes only from serotonin, dopamine and oxytocin. 

Huxley’s disconcerting world is based on the biological assumption that happiness equals pleasure.
 

happiness is not the surplus of pleasant over unpleasant moments. Rather, happiness consists in seeing one’s life in its entirety as meaningful and worthwhile.
 
 As Nietzsche put it, if you have a why to live, you can bear almost any how. A meaningful life can be extremely satisfying even in the midst of hardship, whereas a meaningless life is a terrible ordeal no matter how comfortable it is.
 

As far as we can tell, from a purely scientific viewpoint, human life has absolutely no meaning.
 
Humans are the outcome of blind evolutionary processes that operate without goal or purpose.
 

Our actions are not part of some divine cosmic plan, and if planet Earth were to blow up tomorrow morning, the universe would probably keep going about its business as usual. As far as we can tell at this point, human subjectivity would not be missed. Hence any meaning that people ascribe to their lives is just a delusion. The

So perhaps happiness is synchronising one’s personal delusions of meaning with the prevailing collective delusions.



As long as my personal narrative is in line with the narratives of the people around me, I can convince myself that my life is meaningful, and find happiness in that conviction.
 

This is quite a depressing conclusion. Does happiness really depend on self-delusion?
 

If happiness is based on feeling pleasant sensations, then in order to be happier we need to re-engineer our biochemical system. If happiness is based on feeling that life is meaningful, then in order to be happier we need to delude ourselves more effectively. Is there a third alternative?
 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau stated this view most classically: ‘What I feel to be good – is good. What I feel to be bad – is bad.’

It proves only that humankind is sinful by nature, and that people are easily seduced by Satan. From a Christian viewpoint, the vast majority of people are in more or less the same situation as heroin addicts.

Like Satan, DNA uses fleeting pleasures to tempt people and place them in its power.

Due to this pursuit, the mind is never satisfied. Even when experiencing pleasure, it is not content, because it fears this feeling might soon disappear, and craves that this feeling should stay and intensify.

When the pursuit stops, the mind becomes very relaxed, clear and satisfied.

All kinds of feelings go on arising and passing – joy, anger, boredom, lust – but once you stop craving particular feelings, you can just accept them for what they are. You live in the present moment instead of fantasising about what might have been.


The resulting serenity is so profound that those who spend their lives in the frenzied pursuit of pleasant feelings can hardly imagine it. It is like a man standing for decades on the seashore, embracing certain ‘good’ waves and trying to prevent them from disintegrating, while simultaneously pushing back ‘bad’ waves to prevent them from getting near him. Day in, day out, the man stands on the beach, driving himself crazy with this fruitless exercise. Eventually, he sits down on the sand and just allows the waves to come and go as they please. How peaceful!

Buddha agreed with modern biology and New Age movements that happiness is independent of external conditions. Yet his more important and far more profound insight was that true happiness is also independent of our inner feelings. Indeed, the more significance we give our feelings, the more we crave them, and the more we suffer.

Buddha’s recommendation was to stop not only the pursuit of external achievements, but also the pursuit of inner feelings.

Since we might soon be able to engineer our desires too, perhaps the real question facing us is not ‘What do we want to become?’, but ‘What do we want to want?’ Those who are not spooked by this question probably haven’t given it enough thought.

Time and again, massive increases in human power did not necessarily improve the well-being of individual Sapiens, and usually caused immense misery to other
 
We are more powerful than ever before, but have very little idea what to do with all that power. Worse still, humans seem to be more irresponsible than ever.

Is there anything more dangerous than dissatisfied and irresponsible gods who don’t know what they want?




