---
layout: post
title: "People should learn in their 20s - Rich Tatum"
date: 2016-05-07
categories:
---

From [Rich Tatum](https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-most-difficult-and-useful-things-people-have-to-learn-in-their-20s)

* Most people are very focused on superficial problems and jump from one to another, as you yourself mostly do.
* Your problems are much smaller than you make them out to be.
* Meditation makes this abundantly clear, and everything else much easier.
* There's a profound connection between your body's well-being and your mental and emotional well-being.  As you age you can't fuck off with terrible exercise and eating habits like you did when you were young.  It's incredibly important and actually pretty simple to eat well (vegetables and fruit) and get exercise.
* Western culture has multi-billionaire industries built upon causing problems with your health and selling you dubious pills to fix them.
* Capitalism is not life, but it's important.  It's an app running in the greater OS of existence which has been shown to crash a lot and generally corrupt things.  But it's the framework for much, so learn it.  Study business, negotiation, finance, and the many schemes cooked up by wall street.
* For some people capitalism is life.  Those people are psychopaths.  You will meet them. They are a unique part of humanity, one without guilt or remorse or empathy.  They are not necessarily serial killers or even criminals, but often successful business people. They have a leg up in the game of capital.  Watch your back.
* In this crazy day of information technology and billion dollar startups, everyone has an idea on how to make something new. Look out for the people who are calm and patient; they're the ones that actually will make things.